compressed.md, before:

## The Use of RISC-V Compressed Instructions in Linux Distributions

by Richard W.M. Jones


RISC-V uses a variable sized instruction length.  While the vast
majority of instructions are 32 bits long, 48 bit and longer
instructions are possible (though none are defined at the time of
writing).  The topic of this article is the various 16 bit compressed
instructions — the C major extension, as well as those defined by Zca,
Zcb, Zcf, Zcd, Zce, Zcmp, Zcmt and others.

In particular this article is about what packages, tools and
programming languages may generate compressed instructions and how the
feature might be detected, enabled or disabled in each case.

The background to this topic is that although in 2023 most Linux
distributions for RISC-V use compressed instructions — indeed it is
part of the canonical and now venerable RV64GC standard — we expect in
future that there may be high end server chips which ship without this
feature, since it makes high performance designs more complicated.
Therefore it is useful to have a survey of how compressed instructions
are currently used and enabled, and how they might be disabled in
future.


### Statically detecting compressed instructions in a binary

For a longer discussion of how instructions are encoded, please see
the RISC-V User Spec.

In brief the bottom two bits of the least significant byte of an
instruction tell you if it is not compressed (both bits are `1`), or
compressed (`0 0`, `0 1` or `1 0`).  To detect longer than 32 bit
instructions you also have to look at the major opcode in the same
byte:

```
x001 1111   48-bit instruction
x011 1111   64-bit instruction
x101 1111   48 bit instruction
x111 1111   80 bit and longer instructions
xxxx xx00   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xx01   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xx10   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xxxx   anything else is a normal 32 bit instruction
```

Note that in documentation and in disassembler output, instructions
are shown in big endian format, so the least significant byte is the
last one, but in the actual binary, bytes are always stored little
endian so the first byte in the instruction stream is the least
significant byte (and this is true even on the theoretical big endian
RISC-V machine).

In disassembly output the shorter instruction length is obvious, and
if you also use `-M no-aliases` then the `c.` prefix is shown too:

```
$ objdump -d -M no-aliases /bin/ls
4922:       e4e8                    c.sd    a0,200(s1)
4924:       479d                    c.li    a5,7
4926:       2af902e3                beq     s2,a5,53ca
```

Note the two compressed instructions have least significant byte `e8`
(`xxxx xx00`) and `9d` (`xxxx xx01`).


### Dynamically detecting compressed instructions

While statically examining executables for compressed instructions
gets you some way there, there are JIT code generators which could
generate compressed instructions dynamically.  How should we detect
them?

At least in theory it would be possible to reset the `C` bit in the
MISA CSR to disable compressed instructions and cause them to trap,
but I don't know of any actual hardware that can do this.

QEMU can emulate RISC-V in software (and the emulation is quite
complete, in fact in 2023 it is more complete than any hardware
available).  So a better plan is to modify QEMU so it reports any
compressed instructions when it translates them, a simple
modification.  It is also possible to have QEMU trap on compressed
instructions, using `-cpu rv64,c=false`.  This would allow distros to
be booted and applications run to check dynamically if compressed
instructions are used.


### binutils

The binutils configure `--with-arch` option can be used to set the
default architecture and extensions, eg:

```
./configure --with-arch=rv64gv
```

would disable the compressed extension by default.  If not given then
it appears to be detected from the build machine somehow although the
exact mechanism is unclear.


### gas (GNU assembler) syntax

By default, gas determines if compressed instructions are supported by
using the binutils default, and then using the `-march` command line
flag.

If compressed instructions are supported, gas will "opportunistically
compress" instructions (meaning that if an instruction has a
compressed equivalent it will emit that).  Per-file you can enable or
disable this using:

```
  .option rvc  ; enable opportunistic compressed instructions
  .option arch, +c ; same as rvc
  .option norvc ; disable
  .option arch, -c ; same as norvc
```

ELF object files that *could* contain compressed instructions have the
`EF_RISCV_RVC == 0x0001` flag set.

This does *not* mean they do contain compressed instruction, only that
the gas configuration and command line flags meant that compressed
instructions could have been emitted.  Even then I found that simply
using assembler directives would not turn off the flag.  (The code
only ever sets the flag, so unless you use `gas -march=rv64g` on the
command line, the flag will be set despite your assembler file
containing the right directives to turn off compressed instructions
and no compressed instructions actually being generated.)

A file with this flag set looks like:

```
$ file test.o
test.o: ELF 64-bit LSB relocatable, UCB RISC-V, RVC, double-float ABI, version 1 (SYSV), not stripped
$ eu-readelf -h test.o
ELF Header:
...
  Flags:                             0x5
```

A file without this flag set looks like:

```
$ file test.o
test.o: ELF 64-bit LSB relocatable, UCB RISC-V, double-float ABI, version 1 (SYSV), not stripped
$ eu-readelf -h test.o
...
  Flags:                             0x4
```

Compressed instructions can also be generated by explicit opcode, eg.
this generates the compressed instruction explicitly:

```
  c.li    a5,0
```

However if the `-march` setting does not support compressed, gas will
correctly give an error instead of generating the instruction:

```
$ gcc -c -Wa,-march=rv64g test.s
test.s: Assembler messages:
test.s:19: Error: unrecognized opcode `c.li a5,0', extension `c' required
```

### GCC

GCC can be configured with an explicit architecture, eg:

```
./configure --with-arch=rv64gc
```

to enable (or disable) generation of compressed and other extensions.

The architecture can be overridden for individual files using the
`-march` option, eg. `-march=rv64g`

GCC 13 contains some hand-written assembler that explicitly sets
`.option norvc` (but not any which explicitly enable it).


### LLVM and Clang

LLVM & Clang do generate compressed instructions in the default
configuration.  I have not found a way to disable this at
configuration time.  (This is not to say it is not possible, just that
I haven't found out how.)

At runtime you can use:

```
clang -march=rv64g
```

which generates code with no compressed instructions, but this is not
very convenient for Linux distributions.


### Linux kernel

The Linux kernel in general may be compiled with or without compressed
instructions.  This may be chosen using `CONFIG_RISCV_ISA_C`.

The kernel has some assembler files that use `.option rvc` or `.option
norvc`, which would need to be examined carefully when enabling or
disabling compressed instructions.  The kernel also uses explicit
`-march=` compiler parameters in a few places.

#### eBPF JIT

The eBPF JIT in the kernel may emit compressed instructions.  However
if `CONFIG_RISCV_ISA_C` is not set then these are not emitted.


### QEMU

QEMU has support for emulating guests that use C, Zca, Zcb, Zcf, Zcd,
Zce, Zcmp and Zcmt.  This emulation can be disabled using `-cpu
rv64,c=false` which will cause these instructions to trap with an
illegal instruction exception.

When QEMU emulates another guest architecture on a RISC-V host it
generates RISC-V instructions (as a kind of JIT) using the Tiny Code
Generator (TCG, `tcg/riscv/` in the source).  At present (2023) it
never generates compressed instructions, although that might be added
in future.

QEMU itself may be compiled on a RISC-V host with or without
compressed instructions.


### Rust

Rust seems to follow LLVM defaults, but as far as I can tell there is
no `-march` equivalent.  The nearest is:

```
rustc --target riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu prog.rs
```

but there is no `riscv64g-*` shown in the target list.  Whether or not
this can be enabled and how to set the default is unknown.


### Golang

Go 1.21 does not generate compressed instructions.


### OCaml

OCaml 5.1 does not generate compressed instructions.


### Java

OpenJDK's HotSpot JIT supports RISC-V since 2022
([JEP 422](https://openjdk.org/jeps/422)).  The default since 2023 has
been to use compressed instructions in the JIT-ed target code.
This may be disabled by setting the `-UseRVC` flag:

```
java -XX:-UseRVC
```

This may also be disabled by default by making a single line change in
`jdk/src/hotspot/cpu/riscv/globals_riscv.hpp`


### Javascript

#### V8

V8 is the Javascript JIT engine used in Chromium, WASM, Node.js and
elsewhere.  Note Fedora ships `v8-314` (a very old version), and
`nodejs` (containing V8, patched?), but not V8 itself.  This analysis
is based on upstream V8.

My reading of the source of V8 is that it always assumes compressed
instructions are available and provides no way to select this feature
at compile or runtime.  Also the support for compressed instructions
is intertwined with the code generator in a way that would make it
hard to separate out.


#### SpiderMonkey

SpiderMonkey is the Javascript JIT engine used in Firefox.

SpiderMonkey uses code from V8 to emit RISC-V instructions.  However
although they have copied the compressed extension code from V8 it
does not appear that it is actually called, and it appears that only
32 bit instructions will be emitted.

Commit message:

compressed: Add incomplete discussion about Haskell

compressed.md, after:

## The Use of RISC-V Compressed Instructions in Linux Distributions

by Richard W.M. Jones


RISC-V uses a variable sized instruction length.  While the vast
majority of instructions are 32 bits long, 48 bit and longer
instructions are possible (though none are defined at the time of
writing).  The topic of this article is the various 16 bit compressed
instructions — the C major extension, as well as those defined by Zca,
Zcb, Zcf, Zcd, Zce, Zcmp, Zcmt and others.

In particular this article is about what packages, tools and
programming languages may generate compressed instructions and how the
feature might be detected, enabled or disabled in each case.

The background to this topic is that although in 2023 most Linux
distributions for RISC-V use compressed instructions — indeed it is
part of the canonical and now venerable RV64GC standard — we expect in
future that there may be high end server chips which ship without this
feature, since it makes high performance designs more complicated.
Therefore it is useful to have a survey of how compressed instructions
are currently used and enabled, and how they might be disabled in
future.


### Statically detecting compressed instructions in a binary

For a longer discussion of how instructions are encoded, please see
the RISC-V User Spec.

In brief the bottom two bits of the least significant byte of an
instruction tell you if it is not compressed (both bits are `1`), or
compressed (`0 0`, `0 1` or `1 0`).  To detect longer than 32 bit
instructions you also have to look at the major opcode in the same
byte:

```
x001 1111   48-bit instruction
x011 1111   64-bit instruction
x101 1111   48 bit instruction
x111 1111   80 bit and longer instructions
xxxx xx00   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xx01   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xx10   16-bit compressed instruction
xxxx xxxx   anything else is a normal 32 bit instruction
```

Note that in documentation and in disassembler output, instructions
are shown in big endian format, so the least significant byte is the
last one, but in the actual binary, bytes are always stored little
endian so the first byte in the instruction stream is the least
significant byte (and this is true even on the theoretical big endian
RISC-V machine).

In disassembly output the shorter instruction length is obvious, and
if you also use `-M no-aliases` then the `c.` prefix is shown too:

```
$ objdump -d -M no-aliases /bin/ls
4922:       e4e8                    c.sd    a0,200(s1)
4924:       479d                    c.li    a5,7
4926:       2af902e3                beq     s2,a5,53ca
```

Note the two compressed instructions have least significant byte `e8`
(`xxxx xx00`) and `9d` (`xxxx xx01`).


### Dynamically detecting compressed instructions

While statically examining executables for compressed instructions
gets you some way there, there are JIT code generators which could
generate compressed instructions dynamically.  How should we detect
them?

At least in theory it would be possible to reset the `C` bit in the
MISA CSR to disable compressed instructions and cause them to trap,
but I don't know of any actual hardware that can do this.

QEMU can emulate RISC-V in software (and the emulation is quite
complete, in fact in 2023 it is more complete than any hardware
available).  So a better plan is to modify QEMU so it reports any
compressed instructions when it translates them, a simple
modification.  It is also possible to have QEMU trap on compressed
instructions, using `-cpu rv64,c=false`.  This would allow distros to
be booted and applications run to check dynamically if compressed
instructions are used.


### binutils

The binutils configure `--with-arch` option can be used to set the
default architecture and extensions, eg:

```
./configure --with-arch=rv64gv
```

would disable the compressed extension by default.  If not given then
it appears to be detected from the build machine somehow although the
exact mechanism is unclear.


### gas (GNU assembler) syntax

By default, gas determines if compressed instructions are supported by
using the binutils default, and then using the `-march` command line
flag.

If compressed instructions are supported, gas will "opportunistically
compress" instructions (meaning that if an instruction has a
compressed equivalent it will emit that).  Per-file you can enable or
disable this using:

```
  .option rvc  ; enable opportunistic compressed instructions
  .option arch, +c ; same as rvc
  .option norvc ; disable
  .option arch, -c ; same as norvc
```

ELF object files that *could* contain compressed instructions have the
`EF_RISCV_RVC == 0x0001` flag set.

This does *not* mean they do contain compressed instruction, only that
the gas configuration and command line flags meant that compressed
instructions could have been emitted.  Even then I found that simply
using assembler directives would not turn off the flag.  (The code
only ever sets the flag, so unless you use `gas -march=rv64g` on the
command line, the flag will be set despite your assembler file
containing the right directives to turn off compressed instructions
and no compressed instructions actually being generated.)

A file with this flag set looks like:

```
$ file test.o
test.o: ELF 64-bit LSB relocatable, UCB RISC-V, RVC, double-float ABI, version 1 (SYSV), not stripped
$ eu-readelf -h test.o
ELF Header:
...
  Flags:                             0x5
```

A file without this flag set looks like:

```
$ file test.o
test.o: ELF 64-bit LSB relocatable, UCB RISC-V, double-float ABI, version 1 (SYSV), not stripped
$ eu-readelf -h test.o
...
  Flags:                             0x4
```

Compressed instructions can also be generated by explicit opcode, eg.
this generates the compressed instruction explicitly:

```
  c.li    a5,0
```

However if the `-march` setting does not support compressed, gas will
correctly give an error instead of generating the instruction:

```
$ gcc -c -Wa,-march=rv64g test.s
test.s: Assembler messages:
test.s:19: Error: unrecognized opcode `c.li a5,0', extension `c' required
```

### GCC

GCC can be configured with an explicit architecture, eg:

```
./configure --with-arch=rv64gc
```

to enable (or disable) generation of compressed and other extensions.

The architecture can be overridden for individual files using the
`-march` option, eg. `-march=rv64g`

GCC 13 contains some hand-written assembler that explicitly sets
`.option norvc` (but not any which explicitly enable it).


### LLVM and Clang

LLVM & Clang do generate compressed instructions in the default
configuration.  I have not found a way to disable this at
configuration time.  (This is not to say it is not possible, just that
I haven't found out how.)

At runtime you can use:

```
clang -march=rv64g
```

which generates code with no compressed instructions, but this is not
very convenient for Linux distributions.


### Linux kernel

The Linux kernel in general may be compiled with or without compressed
instructions.  This may be chosen using `CONFIG_RISCV_ISA_C`.

The kernel has some assembler files that use `.option rvc` or `.option
norvc`, which would need to be examined carefully when enabling or
disabling compressed instructions.  The kernel also uses explicit
`-march=` compiler parameters in a few places.

#### eBPF JIT

The eBPF JIT in the kernel may emit compressed instructions.  However
if `CONFIG_RISCV_ISA_C` is not set then these are not emitted.


### QEMU

QEMU has support for emulating guests that use C, Zca, Zcb, Zcf, Zcd,
Zce, Zcmp and Zcmt.  This emulation can be disabled using `-cpu
rv64,c=false` which will cause these instructions to trap with an
illegal instruction exception.

When QEMU emulates another guest architecture on a RISC-V host it
generates RISC-V instructions (as a kind of JIT) using the Tiny Code
Generator (TCG, `tcg/riscv/` in the source).  At present (2023) it
never generates compressed instructions, although that might be added
in future.

QEMU itself may be compiled on a RISC-V host with or without
compressed instructions.


### Rust

Rust seems to follow LLVM defaults, but as far as I can tell there is
no `-march` equivalent.  The nearest is:

```
rustc --target riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu prog.rs
```

but there is no `riscv64g-*` shown in the target list.  Whether or not
this can be enabled and how to set the default is unknown.


### Golang

Go 1.21 does not generate compressed instructions.


### OCaml

OCaml 5.1 does not generate compressed instructions.


### Haskell

Haskell can use LLVM (but only a non-current version), or can use its
own code generator.  As I understand it, use of LLVM is not common
since it has some disadvantages.

*[TBD]*


### Java

OpenJDK's HotSpot JIT supports RISC-V since 2022
([JEP 422](https://openjdk.org/jeps/422)).  The default since 2023 has
been to use compressed instructions in the JIT-ed target code.
This may be disabled by setting the `-UseRVC` flag:

```
java -XX:-UseRVC
```

This may also be disabled by default by making a single line change in
`jdk/src/hotspot/cpu/riscv/globals_riscv.hpp`


### Javascript

#### V8

V8 is the Javascript JIT engine used in Chromium, WASM, Node.js and
elsewhere.  Note Fedora ships `v8-314` (a very old version), and
`nodejs` (containing V8, patched?), but not V8 itself.  This analysis
is based on upstream V8.

My reading of the source of V8 is that it always assumes compressed
instructions are available and provides no way to select this feature
at compile or runtime.  Also the support for compressed instructions
is intertwined with the code generator in a way that would make it
hard to separate out.


#### SpiderMonkey

SpiderMonkey is the Javascript JIT engine used in Firefox.

SpiderMonkey uses code from V8 to emit RISC-V instructions.  However
although they have copied the compressed extension code from V8 it
does not appear that it is actually called, and it appears that only
32 bit instructions will be emitted.
